This book writing guideline
===========================

This book writing guideline is made by Ã‰rico Vieira Porto, 2016.

This guideline is still being written. A Portuguese version will arrive shortly.

I'm writing this guide to try to translate with words the sense of style I am
aiming. Also by reading this, I can remind to keep a consistent writing.

Most of the book by E. B. White and William Strunk, Jr., The Elements of Style
should be applied to the text - all in all, try to remove the fat from the text
and leave the minimum information that should be presented in an introductory
text.


###Long term concepts vs short term technology

In the main text, try to avoid using terms that are dependent on technologies
that change within small period of time, prefer more conceptual explanations.
Use the secondary space of each chapter to discuss short term technology, that
should be the current technology. When thinking of which pieces of each
technology are short term, pieces of things that had the name changed in less
then ten years are a good guess - think processor generation vs power supply
connectors specification.


###Referencing

Prefer claims that can backed up with references, but don't reference everything
as it will pollute the pure text. When referencing, specially when it's expected
that reader follow that reference at near time while reading, link to pages that
should be available in long term, and prefer clean website url.

If you need to reference a website that the main site is expected to be
available, but there is no guarantee on the exact page, use terms that give good
results on the in site search page. As an example, suppose you want to explain
how to mount the processor on the motherboard, an Youtube video would be handy,
but that specific video could be unavailable in the next month or year. But it's
expected that Youtube itself will be online, and it's reasonable to say that
there will be at least some videos of people mounting processors to
motherboards. So link to the appropriate search url inside the webpage with the
parameters that gives acceptable results for content, which for this particular
example could be
https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=install+cpu+motherboard .
